for that wonderful hour and now we go on
with the next part of the program for
today we have Dr Anand Bali Yogi
bhavanani here
who will be doing the simplified Yoga
practices for the health professionals
and
he needs no introduction no biodata I
don't have anything to read about him so
he said like keep it very short whatever
it is just one word or anything whatever
comes out of him comes out very
soulfully and that is why he is able to
reach you know the audience or the
interact interact with the people so
that is one thing that is very very true
about him and we have all felt it so
over to another yogisa for that session
on practices
so many of the
yoga
Seekers who are here
we are all here on
this International Day of yoga and
celebrating it here because SRI Balaji
vidyapeeth has the center for yoga
therapy Education and Research where
salutogenesis is our Focus what are the
faculty happy be the best we that we can
be in this lifetime
and
yoga has become so popular well one of
the major factors for all of it has been
that the West has adopted it
and we
seem to always wait for the West to give
us the certification and the moment the
Western countries said that Well yoga is
good we said well it belongs to us
up to that time not too many were
thinking about it and it's quite amazing
the number of people who have taken up
yoga a recent survey in the USA that was
shared by my dear friend Khalsa recently
there are quite a few practicing uh 36.7
million and
83 million said they are likely to try
yoga in the USA and the number of
practitioners if you look at it going up
from about 15 million in 2008 that just
in eight years it has more than doubled
so this is part of this movement of yoga
to become popular
and our honorable prime minister
was the first to
say that why not have a yoga day and as
a result of that
this is what happened last year in
rajpath this year it was happening in
pondicherry between 6 30 and 7 30 this
morning for those of you who have seen
the TV this morning you would have seen
it in tomorrow morning's papers we'll
have some beautiful photos of it and
same thing is happening happened at
Chandigarh today with I believe about 40
or 50 000 people again led by our prime
minister
well a man who leads from the front as
you have seen last year and again this
year
now here we are trying to bring together
the experiential wisdom of yoga because
as special and his service saying you
have to experience it you have to use
the same techniques the same methodology
if you are to have the experience
and without doing the technology you
will not experience it and then you say
it is a hallucination so here we are
trying to bring together that with the
empirical modern medicine and quite a
bit of work going on
I thought I'll share with you a few
mechanisms of yoga because what happens
is that
there has to be this integration of the
breath pattern with coordinated smooth
body movements and we are going to do a
few practical techniques before lunch
and I'll only take about 15 minutes for
this so that we don't we have enough
time to eat also
there's a conscious focus on the present
moment when you're doing The Yoga
practices as I'm stretching my arm I
should be thinking what am I doing how
are my arms stretching not what will be
there for lunch today
you know we should be where we are that
is the message of the yoga practice and
once you start doing it in the yoga
session you then take it off the yoga
mat and it should become part of your
day-to-day life 24 hours seven days a
week well for your whole life
when the body is still the mind starts
to calm down we all know that why do we
lie down to go to sleep why are we not
going on a treadmill and trying to sleep
because the body has to First be stilled
when the body is still the mind can
still but if your body is agitated your
mind cannot still itself so on one side
we talk about the psychosomatics
but then we also have to talk about the
Tomato psychics what are the effects
your body work can have on the mind
and again we find when the breath is
steady emotions become more balanced and
thus through these different mechanisms
we are improving all the aspects of
human
psychophysiological functioning
and these healthy improvements
in our well-being
enable us to attain the highest
potential and thus
enable us to manage the stresses you
cannot change the stressor the stressor
will always be the same but you can
decide whether you are going to let it
stress you or not and once again in the
same Hall I repeat what I always say
nothing can stress you unless you let it
stress you
and for those who are sleeping nothing
can stress you unless you let it stress
you
so who makes the choice we when do we
make the choice in the moment how do we
learn to live in that moment and make
the choice well that is why we bring
yoga into the equation so yoga is about
being in the moment making the choice
to be a master of the present moment so
that we can become a master of our
destiny
fate and free will we have free will
right now but my free will now
determines the destiny I'm going to have
to face later
so we are Master of the now and that is
what yoga tells us get into it now and
work on yourself so many techniques but
we are not going to be doing all of this
because what I want to remind you is
that it is the mind the human mind that
helps us because where your mind goes
there the energy flows Prana
and that is why if you are doing this
beautiful yoga practice and you are
thinking what is for lunch
there's no energy
so it's better you pick your nose and be
in the now you have more chances of
having energy then do the most
complicated yoga practice while thinking
about what movie you're going to watch
on CNN tonight
so be careful what where your mind goes
so we can use our mind to change our
brain
and by changing your brain you change
your mind for the better this is called
self-directed neuroplasty
neuroplasticity is the future and that
is where yoga comes in because you are
doing it for yourself
now if you can help a cell culture grow
or not grow
out in a petri dish
imagine what you can do when those cells
are in you
and that is why the Yama as madhavan Dr
madhavan said today the Yama are
restricting all the negative aspects of
you
stopping that growth and the niyama are
all the enhancing the positive aspects
of you so simultaneously you are working
on that samathwam of balancing reducing
the negativities enhancing the
positivities and constantly growing in
Balance yesterday your balance was here
that is also a balance today it is here
tomorrow you want it here but you always
want balance you don't want to go up
here without balance
because Down Here Without balance you
can survive the fall up here it's very
difficult to salarize the fall if you
don't have balance and this is where the
power of the Mind comes in and again
shared a very beautiful chart these this
will be available it's all right you
know what has happened is you have
already put the card before and that is
why we used to say yoga for diabetes
yoga for peace yoga for well-being I say
we should say well-being through yoga
Peace through Yoga Health through yoga
not yoga for health but Health through
yoga so yoga then there's no
anticipation there's no expectation and
automatically the manifestation occurs
we are going to do a very simple
technique and again I once again the
third time today request you to sit
straight
wherever you are sitting
sit with your back
the lower back the middle upper back the
neck the head aligned that's the only
practical instruction Lord Krishna gives
us
sit sit erect people say sit straight
you cannot sit straight because your
spine itself has all those curls you can
sit erect for sure you can align your
spine bring your hands now into a mudra
we are going to do some uni nostril
breathing and I'll tell you why we are
doing it later so that no expectations
these first two fingers we are going to
bend this is called the nasika nasika
mudra
I want you to first let's do the right
side first so with your right ring
finger
close your left nostril your right
nostril is open
okay right nostril open this is Surya
Nadi now let's take in and out a few
deep breaths breathe in two three four
radar 2 3 4. breathe in two three four
Veda two three four
Within two three four
Ved out two three four relax your hand
this was just in small demonstration of
what we call Surya Nadi pranayama
sometimes called Surya anuloma Panama
different names where we are breathing
exclusively through a uni nostril the
right Union nostril breathing
now similarly we can breathe through the
left uni nostril so with your thumb
close your right nostril and let us
breathe in and out through the left
nostril a few breaths I'm going to
increase it to six now breathe in two
three four five six breathe out two
three four five six breathe in two three
four five six
breathe out two three four five six
breathe in two three four five six
breathe out two three four five six just
relax your hand and just sit quietly a
few seconds I wish I could give you more
but
whenever we have these events we are
running short of time
we're just sitting quietly and just
letting yourself
balance
now what we were doing
is basically the union austral breathing
right and left the right is the soya
Nadi left is the Chandra Nadi and if
you're too lazy to put your hand to your
nose
for whose benefit for your own benefit
but anyway if you're too lazy or for
some reason cannot all you have to do is
lie on your side
so if you lie on your side whichever
side is dominant
after about 15 to 20 minutes that
nostril will become dominant this is
part of normal physiology and you will
be performing either Surya Nadi or
Chandra Nadi passively
and so whenever we want to give
therapeutic usage of these techniques in
people who cannot do them because of
physical debilitation we give this
now what are we doing with these
techniques we are basically influencing
our right and left brain
the right nostril is connected to your
left brain your left nostril to your
right vein now you know the secret about
the brains
your left brain is all the stuff you are
doing to get things
okay money logic calculation how can I
get more people to sign on to my
lectures how can I get more students how
can I get more money and all of that is
the left the right is how can I give
more how can I give better so the giving
part of you is your right
and the getting part is your left
this is a very small simplification but
I like to put it that way and of course
if you look at your left it's very dull
because you are so busy getting you have
no time to appreciate what you have got
but when you start to give you start to
appreciate more and more because the
more you give the more you get
I just told you the secret my father
taught me as a small kid
the more you give the more you get
it doesn't matter whether it is
physically mentally emotionally or
spiritually
the more respect you give the more
respect you get the more love you give
the more love you get the more help you
give the more help you get the more
health and wellness and happiness you
give the more you get
now again don't give because you are
going to get
don't again put the card paper give
because you are a human being and human
beings should give we are the givers
and somehow it's been built into the
women
to give more they sort of have an
inherent genetic tendency to give more
and I wish we men could develop that
more and I hope you women will not stop
that
because the moment you stop that the
world is going to be a very difficult
place because if we all are getting
getting getting where are we going to
get it from
huh anyway so when you are doing your
right nostril breathing you are helping
the getting part of you because you need
to have enough to survive the joke goes
when you're totally in your left brain
there's nothing right about it
but when you are totally in your right
brain there's nothing left
it's actually a very good way to think
about it because you need to have
something at the end of the day you need
a house you need a car you need you will
need some things
so that is fine but then where does need
stop and where does greed begin very
very thin line and for most of us there
is no line
it's it's all greed
the sort of the three line is the need
so what we are learning through the
right nostril and left nostril breathing
and the alternate nostril is balance
ourselves balance our giving in our
getting balance who we are and when we
are balanced we can be a better human
being now the second thing which is one
of our popular things and all of you
have done many times is I'm going to ask
you to all please stand up
we are going to shake up our tensions as
we don't have much time we will only do
both hands not right and left but just
give a good Shake shaking up all your
tensions their attentions sticking to us
we don't want to keep our tensions again
it's part of that give them up and we
keep on wanting more and more tensions
and grabbing all our tensions and some
people are so tight they don't want to
let go of the tensions also because
they'll fall apart now as fast as
possible as fast as possible and we have
very good plastic surgery Department
here so in case your fingers fall off
we'll reattach them so fine now catch
hold of all your tensions take in a deep
breath
and throw it out
just let your hands be by your side and
enjoy
enjoy a sense of lightness
when you have thrown off your tensions
you don't have to hold them anymore they
don't have to weigh you down
you're not bogged down by your tensions
and stresses anymore
it's a positive choice to throw them out
show them they don't belong within you
again one more time
because we
we always need to practice practice
makes perfect and we doctors are always
practicing
we are never perfect we're always
Medical Practice watch out we have
already told you what we are doing right
we're just practicing okay okay nice
fast one fast fast as fast as possible
fast look at my fingers you cannot even
see them right yeah now catch hold of
those tensions
throw them out
now just sit down and in your serrated
position just sit quietly
and enjoy that feeling of relaxation
that comes when you throw it out
when you throw your garbage out
we throw out our physical garbage but we
don't throw out our mental garbage our
emotional garbage which is so much more
dangerous the mental and emotional
garbage we carry around
it's really pathetic
because we don't throw it out yeah so to
my property
and stop identifying with your stresses
and deal with them as they should be
they are just junk throw them out don't
keep them within
now there's a very nice practice which I
thought we will do and we'll be ending
with this today
is to help work on the different centers
we have different centers in the body
called the chakras
and these are all along the mid spinal
area the main ones now there are minor
ones all over the body but the major
ones along this spine and that is why we
human beings need to have a healthy
spine so that the energy can move freely
and what we want to do is that we are
going to be breathing in and we are
going to stretch up
then we are going to breathe out bring
the hands onto the top of the head
breathe in
bring it to the forehead as you breathe
out
breathe in at the forehead
breathe out and bring it to the throat
breathe in at the throat
and bring it down to the chest
so again we are going to repeat breathe
in and stretch up
breathe out onto the top of the hand
breathe in at the top of the head
breathe out and bring it to the forehand
breathe in at the forehead
out into the throat
in at the Third
and out at the chest
and a third time to make sure we have
done it to the best of our ability
stretching up breathe in
out top of the head
in at the top of the hand
out at the forehand
in at the forehead
out the throat
in at the throat
and out back to the chest
just relaxing your hands again this
practice we are working with these
energy centers we have a heart we have a
base spinal center we have
centers coming up but here primarily we
are working with the heart center the
third Center the brow Center and the
cranial Center so four of the centers
and when you stretch up like this it is
an act where you are saying I am
connecting with that Universe this is a
connect thing with the higher and that
is why this is the gesture we always
have kept in our culture for divine you
don't go and greet somebody like this in
an office unless you're going to a
politician and want something from them
okay
all right you know this is for the
Divinity this is also for Divinity
because these are the higher centers now
this is the center where we become human
the again chakra is where we go from
being an animal a spinal being to having
a higher Consciousness and this is the
place where you start to tap into your
humanness being a human being not a
human doing but a human being
this is the center of Purity this is the
center of compassion empathy where you
can connect with others and these are
the centers we need to develop these
lower centers are more shared with the
animals and us we need to work on them
but we have a lot of animal in us
already right
but what about the human in us and then
what about the Divine in US and that is
why this very simple practice is good
for the shoulders good for the neck it's
a good stretch you know physical
benefits are one side but more
importantly you are connecting and yoga
is all about connectivity finding the
connectivity and
yeah
finding the connectivity and just being
connected with everyone everything in
the universe the last thing for today is
what is called my favorite practice
where we are going to tense ourselves as
much as possible and then we are going
to let go and relax
tension relaxation coupling okay
so what we are going to do from the
seated position start to tense your toes
your ankles your calf muscles your knees
your thighs the gluteal the hip the
abdomen the chest the lower back the
upper back now start to tense your
fingers your arms your forearms
the shoulders the neck now your face
make it as tense as possible hold this
tension tension tension tension tension
tension and then let
go
it's always good to do it lying down or
sitting standing you know the danger is
you get so he likes to fall off this
stage and that will be quite a
demonstration right Dr another falling
off the stage losing balance after
talking about balance again let's do
this huh from your toes tense your toes
your feet your ankles
coming up to the knees the thighs the
hips the abdomen the thorax the back now
your fingers your forearms your elbows
arms shoulders neck now your face your
eyes ears everything has turns stands
tense tense tents and let go
just enjoy the relaxation response that
you can
tap into when you do this
tension relaxation
you can trigger your own relaxation
response
and remember it is in relaxation that we
heal
no healing occurs when we are tense
healing only occurs when we are relaxed
one of the greatest contributions yoga
can give health professionals
is in teaching us how to relax
one last time you have to earn your
lunch
okay so put in your best effort those 10
stands your feet your ankles your knees
your thighs your hips
abdomen chest back
fingers the whole hand arm forearm the
shoulder the neck the face as tense
tense tense tense tens tents and lit
enjoy the feeling of relaxation
breathe in a regular simple manner
and just let a feeling of relaxation
seep into every cell of your body
every part of your physical mental and
emotional makeup
creating a sense of wholesomeness
wholesomeness is health
wholesomeness is joy happiness
when we can be
invigorated with a sense of
wholesomeness
we can be the best we can be
I close with a prayer
for the universal well-being
when we pray for Universal well-being
happiness in the universe joy in the
universe we don't have to ask for
ourselves
let all beings be happy well at ease let
them be the best they can be
[Applause]
oh
foreign
[Music]
thank you very much
[Applause]